# The Linux Command Line, 2nd Edition, © 2019

## Chapter 11: The Environment

* printenv Print part or all of the environment
* set Set shell options
* export Export environment to subsequently executed programs
* alias Create an alias for a command

### What is Stored in the Environment

Two basic types of data in the environment:

* _environment variables_
* _shell variables_

Programmatic data:

* _aliases_
* _shell functions_

#### Examining the Environment

`$ printenv | less`

The `printenv` can calso list the value of a specific variable.

```
$ printenv USER
dstevenson
````

The `set` command, when used without options or arguments, will display both the shell and environment variables, 
as well as any defined shell functions. Unlike `printenv`, the output is sorted in alphabetical order.

`$ set | less`

```
$ echo $HOME
/home/dstevenson
```

```
$ alias
alias alert='notify-send --urgency=low -i "$([ $? = 0 ] && echo terminal || echo error)" "$(history|tail -n1|sed -e '\''s/^\s*[0-9]\+\s*//;s/[;&|]\s*alert$//'\'')"'
alias egrep='egrep --color=auto'
alias fgrep='fgrep --color=auto'
alias grep='grep --color=auto'
alias l='ls -CF'
alias la='ls -A'
alias ll='ls -alF'
alias ls='ls --color=auto'
alias rm='rm --preserve-root'
```

#### Some Interesting Variables

Variable Contents
* DISPLAY The name of your display. Usually this is :0, meaning the first display generated by the X server.
* EDITOR The name of the program to be used for text editing.
* SHELL The name of your shell program.
* HOME The pathname of your home directory.
* LANG Defines the character set and collation order of your language.
* OLDPWD The previous working directory.
* PAGER The name of the program to be used for paging output. This is often set to /usr/bin/less
* PATH A colon separated list of directories that are searched when you enter the name of an executable program.
* PS1 Stands for "prompt string 1".
* PWD The current working directory
* TERM The name of your terminal type. 
* TZ Specifies your time zone.
* USER Your username.

### How Is the Environment Established?

When we log on to the system, the `bash` program starts and reads a series of configuration scripts called _startup files_, which define the current environment shared by all users. This is followed by more startup files in your home directory that define our personal environment. The exact sequence depends on the type of shell sesssion being started. There are two kidns:

* A login shell session
* A non-login shell session

Startup files
* /etc/profile
* ~/.bash_profile
* ~/.bash_login Used if ~/.bash_profile is not found.
* ~/.profile Used if neither ~/.bash_profile nor ~/.bash_login is found.

Startup Files for Non-Login Shell Sessions

* /etc/bash.bashrc A global configuration script that applies to all users
* ~/.bashrc A user's personal startup file.

The ~/.bashrc is probably the most important startup file from the ordinary user's point of view, because it is almost always read.

#### What's  in a Startup File?

A typical .bash_profile might run ~/.bashrc (if it exists) to get aliases and functions, set and export the PATH variable. Ubuntu uses ~/.profile instead of ~/.bash_profile.

### Modifying the Environment

#### Which Files Should We Modify?

To modify your PATH or define additional environment variables, place those changes in _.bash_profile_ (or .profile in Ubuntu).

Otherwise, place changes in ~/.bashrc.

#### Text Editors

Text editors fall into two basic categories: graphical and text-based.
GNOME and KDE both include some popular graphical editors.
GNOME shipes with gedit, which is usually called "Text Editor" in the GNOME menu.
KDE usually ships with three, which are kedit, kwrite, and kate.

There are many text-based editors. The popular ones we'll encounter are nano, vi and emacs.
vi has been mostly replaced by "vim" (vi imiproved).


